The presented report is a part of an ongoing global project entitled “TROP ICSU: Climate Change Education” led by the International Union of Biological Sciences (IUBS), implemented through IISER, Pune. 

It is a global project that creates innovative pedagogical resources by implementing climate science and climate change case studies. This project aims to integrate climate change education with the core curriculum. It focuses on collecting, curating, developing, and disseminating various pedagogical resources for integrating climate change topics in regular curricula of multiple disciplines, at school and university education levels, across the globe.

The objective of my study was to understanding the global scenario of carbon emissions over a time period of 120 years and finding out the reasons why carbon emissions are one of the contributing factors which are leading towards global climate change. The primary focus of this research was to understand the change in the global greenhouse gases and the carbon footprint and how the top carbon-emitting countries should take responsibility for utilizing the carbon budget.

A greenhouse gas (GHG) is defined as a type of gas which is absorbing and emitting the energy in the infrared band of the electromagnetic spectrum and this kind of gas is mostly generated due to human activities. In the atmosphere of the earth there are different kinds of greenhouse gases which are present such as carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), water vapour (H2O in gaseous state) and ozone (O3).

A gradual increase in the emission of greenhouse gases could be observed after the industrial revolution started in the 18th century in England. The industrial revolution was helping in the development related to the fields of technology and the socioeconomic development of the nation. There was a huge demand for using various energy sources such as coal, petroleum products and electricity which eventually led to an increase in the amount of carbon emissions. Due to the various changes in the field of technology there was an increase in the use of various natural resources in various sectors.

